Tutorials (#221)
applied-material-modeling/neml2: doc/tutorials/models/just_in_time_compilation/main.md

@insert-title:tutorials-models-just-in-time-compilation

[TOC]

## Problem description

In NEML2, all tensor operations are traceable. The trace of an operation records the operator type, a stack of arguments and outputs, together with additional context. Multiple operations performed in sequence can be traced together into a *graph* representing the flow of data through operators. Such graph representation is primarily used for two purposes:

> - just-in-time (JIT) compilation and optimization of the operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Just-in-time (JIT) compilation and optimization of the operations
```

> - backward automatic-differentiation (AD)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Backward automatic-differentiation (AD)
```

> This tutorial illustrates the utility of JIT compilation of NEML2 models, and the a [later tutorial](#tutorials-optimization-automatic-differentiation) demonstrates the use of backward AD to calculate parameter derivatives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial illustrates the utility of JIT compilation of NEML2 models, and a [later tutorial](#tutorials-optimization-automatic-differentiation) demonstrates the use of backward AD to calculate parameter derivatives.
```

      model.value(inputs);

    utils::last_executed_optimized_graph()->dump();
  }
  ```
  @endsource

  Output:
  ```
  @attach-output:src5
  ```
- <b class="tab-title">Python</b>
  @source:src6
  ```python
  import neml2
  from neml2.tensors import Scalar
  import torch

  model = neml2.load_model("input.i", "eq")

  # Create example input variables for tracing
  a = Scalar.full(1.0)
  b = Scalar.full(2.0)
  c = Scalar.full(3.0)
  t = Scalar.full(0.1)
  a_n = Scalar.full(0.0)
  b_n = Scalar.full(1.0)
  c_n = Scalar.full(2.0)
  t_n = Scalar.full(0.0)

  # Evaluate the model for the first time
  # This is when tracing takes place
  inputs = {"state/a": a,
           "state/b": b,
           "state/c": c,
           "forces/t": t,
           "old_state/a": a_n,
           "old_state/b": b,
           "old_state/c": c,
           "old_forces/t": t}
  for i in range(10):
    model.value(inputs)

  print(torch.jit.last_executed_optimized_graph())
  ```
  @endsource

  Output:
  ```
  @attach-output:src6
  ```

</div>

Note how the optimized graph successfully identifies the common subexpression \f$ t - t_n \f$ and reuses it in all three equations.

## Limitations

> JIT optimization and compilation isn't the holy grail for improving performance of all models. For tensor operations that branch based on variable data, the traced graph cannot capture such data dependency and would potentially produce wrong results. For models defining the derivatives relying on backward automatic differentiation, NEML2 is not able to generate efficient traced graphs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JIT optimization and compilation isn't the holy grail for improving performance of all models. For tensor operations that branch based on variable data, the traced graph cannot capture such data dependency and would potentially produce wrong results. NEML2 is unable to generate traced graphs for models that include derivatives of other models in the forward evaluation when those derivatives are defined with automatic differentiation.
```

> Due to these limitations, certain models disable the use of JIT compilation. The most notable case is [ImplicitUpdate](#implicitupdate) due to its use of Newton-Raphson solvers which are in general data dependent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to these limitations, certain models disable the use of JIT compilation. The most notable case is [ImplicitUpdate](#implicitupdate) due to its use of Newton-Raphson solvers which are in general data dependent.  However, the portions of the complete model defining the implicit function to solve can often benefit from JIT compilation.
```
